Chapter 2: Dapr @ 20000 feet (#8)
amolenk/docs: docs/architecture/dapr-for-net-developers/dapr-at-20000-feet.md

Dapr also runs in [containerized environments](https://docs.dapr.io/concepts/overview/#kubernetes-hosted), such as Kubernetes. Figure 2-7 shows Dapr running in a separate side-car container along with the application container in the same Kubernetes pod.

![Sidecar architecture](./media/kubernetes-hosted-dapr-sidecar.png)

**Figure 2-7**. Kubernetes-hosted Dapr sidecar

## Dapr performance considerations

As you've seen, Dapr exposes a sidecar architecture to decouple your application from distributed application capabilities. Invoking a Dapr operation requires at least one out-of-process network call. Figure 2-7 presents an example of a Dapr traffic pattern.

![Dapr traffic patterns](./media/dapr-traffic-patterns.png)

**Figure 2-7**. Dapr traffic patterns

Looking at the previous figure, one might question the latency and overhead incurred for each call.  

The Dapr team has invested heavily in performance. A tremendous amount of engineering effort has gone into to making Dapr efficient. Calls between Dapr sidecars are always made with gRPC, which delivers high performance and small, binary payloads. In most cases, the additional overhead should be less than 1 millisecond. 

> To increase performance, developers can implement calls to Dapr building blocks with gRPC. 

Author: ```suggestion
To increase performance, developers can call the Dapr building blocks with gRPC. 
```

gRPC is a modern, high-performance framework that evolves the age-old [remote procedure call (RPC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call) protocol. gRPC uses HTTP/2 for its transport protocol, which provides significant performance enhancements over HTTP RESTFul service, including:

- Multiplexing support for sending multiple parallel requests over the same connection - HTTP 1.1 limits processing to one request/response message at a time.
- Bidirectional full-duplex communication for sending both client requests and server responses simultaneously.
- Built-in streaming enabling requests and responses to asynchronously stream large data sets.

## Dapr and service meshes

Service mesh is another rapidly evolving technology for distributed applications. 

> A service mesh is a configurable infrastructure layer with built-in capabilities to handle service-to-service communication, resiliency, load balancing, and telemetry capture. It moves the responsibility for these concerns out of the microservices and into service mesh layer. Like Dapr, a service mesh also exposes a sidecar architecture.

Author: ```suggestion
A service mesh is a configurable infrastructure layer with built-in capabilities to handle service-to-service communication, resiliency, load balancing, and telemetry capture. It moves the responsibility for these concerns out of the microservices and into the service mesh layer. Like Dapr, a service mesh also follows a sidecar architecture.
```

Reviewer: Added

Figure 2-8 shows an application that implements service mesh technology.

![Service Mesh](./media/service-mesh-with-side-car.png)

**Figure 2-8**. Service mesh with a side car.

> Note in the previous figure how messages are intercepted by a proxy that runs alongside each microservice. Each proxy can be configured with traffic rules specific to the microservice. It understands messages and can route them across your services and the outside world.

Author: *Service* and *microservice* are both used in the text. Should we decide on one throughout the text/book? If so, which do you prefer?

Reviewer: Let's go with the rule from our discussion. Microservice in the context of an application. Service when speaking of single service.

So the question becomes, "Is Dapr a service mesh?"

While both technologies use a sidecar architecture, each is different. Dapr provides distributed application features. A service mesh provides a dedicated network infrastructure layer.

As each technology works at a different level, both can work together in the same application. Connected together, application traffic would route to the Dapr sidecar first and then the service mesh sidecar and then out. On the other end, traffic would traverse the stack in reverse order: Service mesh to Dapr to application. 

Figure 2-9 shows an application that implements both Dapr and service mesh technology.

![Dapr and Service Mesh together](./media/dapr-and-service-mesh.png)

> **Figure 2-9**. Dapr and service mesh together.

Author: While it is explained in the Haishi/Yaron book this way, we don't think service invocation is the best way to show how Dapr and a Service Mesh can work together. For this to work, you would probably need to write your own Dapr service discovery component to let the Dapr sidecar route the request to the service mesh sidecar. Even then, you won't gain that much value as Linkerd already does service-to-service invocation pretty well.
We can show the value better by making an example where Service 1 has two sidecars. For example, Service 1 can use a Linkerd sidecar to make calls to Service 2, while at the same time use a Dapr sidecar to store contextual state (or do pub/sub, or use actors).
This way, the sidecars aren't connected together, but both serve the service independently.
